Let us look at the process of launching a
Linux virtual machine. Why do you need a
virtual machine Sometimes when you buy a laptop it
comes with pre-installed windows operating system
and you may not want to remove the OS that came
with the system because you have already paid
for that and sometimes you may also not be able
to have a dual booting option because your bios
or your UEFI has been tied to the OEM.
And therefore it has not allowed you to
have a dual boot. You would also need a virtual
machine because you want to have the experience of
using Linux operating system almost natively.
And. So, the requirements to have a virtual
machine going on your laptop or a system that has
pre-installed operating system such as windows
is as follows. You first need to download
an ISO image of the Linux operating system
and I would recommend Ubuntu 20.04 long time
support version which is currently the latest
LTS version. The next version of 22.04
would appear at the end of April 2022.
And you will pick it up from the Ubuntu website
for the platform x86_64 which is appropriate for
a an Intel or AMD based laptop. You also need a
hypervisor such as an Oracle Virtualbox or VMWARE
workstation player and there are free versions
available. So, you could download one of them
and have it installed on your windows OS. You
will also need some space to have the virtual
machine up and running. The disk space required
would be about 20GB that would be sufficient
to get going but you also need some ram.
So, if your laptop has 4GB ram maybe it is not
a good idea to have a virtual machine running
on top of it but if it has 8 GB or more than
your virtual machine will work quite fine.
So, these are the steps that you require to follow
first download the Ubuntu iso file which would be
about 3GB in size right now and have it ready and
download the oracle virtual box or the VMware
workstation player which is available freely.
Install the hypervisor and then you need to launch
the hypervisor and configure a virtual machine.
And then once you have done that you
could then launch the virtual machine
and have the experience of using the Linux OS
on top of your windows OS almost natively.
So, you can download the
Ubuntu iso from Ubuntu.com and
you could then you know click on the highlighted
link 20.04 LTS and download the image.
You could download the oracle virtual
box from the website virtualbox.org
and you need to click on the link meant
for windows host because that is your host
operating system and then use the exe file
that comes to install the virtualbox.
You can download the VMware workstation player
from the VMware website by searching for it and
you could pick up the windows
version of it because your
host operating system is windows.
So, let us go and try out these to launch
a virtual machine and see how that
works out. So, we have downloaded the
installation media. So, we will first install
the virtualbox. So, right click on the icon
and run it as an administrator you can override
the alert and go ahead and install it anyway.
So, you see that it is installing
now. So, there is an icon for oracle
vm virtualbox created on the desktop.
So, here is the oracle virtualbox manager
that has got launched. So, we now need to add
a new virtual machine. So, we do that with
the new icon that is here and we call
this virtual machine as Ubuntu 20.04
and we need to assign how much of memory that
you would like to use. So, we have let us
2048 MB that is 2 GB of ram that we want to
use for this Linux and we need to create a
virtual hard disk it is a good size.
So, 10 GB is what is recommended. So,
we can go ahead and use it here is where
you could actually fine tune the size.
So, I would go ahead and make it 20 GB. Now we
now need to power on and have the operating system
installed. So, look at the settings
and the storage we would have the IDE.
Let us add a CD there an iso image.
So, we will choose an image file.
So, the image file is now attached.
So, when it boots it would help to boot the
Ubuntu installation medium after which
the installation of os can happen on the
virtual disk okay now let us boot this.
So, all this has happening in a window. So,
the booting of the virtual OS is happening
within a window we can resize that
to help us see little bit better the installation
medium is being checked before commencing the
installation process you could see that the
Ubuntu has started installation process.
So, here we choose the option install Ubuntu
the language of course is already highlighted as
English proceed to continue we will just leave
the default option to be normal installation
and we do not need to download the updates
while installing so that the installation can
finish a bit early. So, the virtual disk is
created by us there is nothing there in that.
So, we can go ahead and say that the operating
system can erase remember that it is only erasing
the virtual disk and not the hard disk of
your host operating system windows.
So, go ahead and then say yes install
now you need to choose the time zone. So,
we are choosing the one for India and we
need to have the first account created.
So, I will give my details here and you need to
give a password for the very first account which
will be the administrator and note down and keep
it safe. So, that you do not forget it. So, as the
installation process is going on you could also
see some icons that are glowing at the bottom that
show what kind of an activity is happening.
So, as the operating system is being installed
there is some activity writing to the
virtual disk. So, that is the activity
here. So, in case some network operations are
happening the network icon also would blink.
The installation can take few minutes.
So, be patient and let it finish.
So, the installation seems to have finished now.
So, the installation is complete now.
So, we can restart the virtual machine
all right.
So, our virtual machine has now muted
and I login with the password I gave by setting it
up. So, we can skip some of these initial settings
and now the virtual machine is up and running on
the base host OS of windows 10 in our case and
let us open the terminal okay and we now have
the terminal command open and we can see that.
So, it is running the kernel 5.11 and we have a
full-fledged Ubuntu 20.04 lts up and running as
a virtual machine on top of the windows.
Shut it down at any time that we are done with
our work and we are back to the virtualbox manager
and here we can any time change the settings.
So, let us say we can go to the settings here and
make more memory allocated for it. For example we
do not want any additional devices to be attached
only hard disk is sufficient we can do that
okay and display also if you wish we want
to give more memory we can do that.
And maybe we can make a slightly larger
window there and then we can when we are ready
we can just boot it and we can just do this
whenever we need to work with the Ubuntu
otherwise the host OS of windows 10 is not
disturbed at all. So, in that sense it is a very
nice way of being able to learn the command
line environment on Ubuntu virtual machine. So,
here in front of you I just booted the
virtual machine again and I am logging in
okay and then I open the terminal
once more to show you that cycle of
getting in to the terminal environment inside
the vm which is running on top of the windows.
And then again coming out and shutting it
down and that is a cycle that you can do
whenever you want to spend your time
with Ubuntu working with the whole OS.
Now let us see how to install a virtual machine
using the VMware workstation player. So,
we have downloaded that utility already. So, right
click and run it as an administrator to install
the VMware workstation player.
So, we override the alert.
So, we see that the workstation player
version 16 is starting to install
we accept the license agreement and move on and
let it install the standard options okay. So,
we have now started to install that it will take
about a minute or two to install the utility.
So, the installation takes a couple of minutes.
So, there is an icon on the desktop created by the
utility which we could use to
open the workstation player.
So, let us now finish the utility and launch the
workstation player. So, we are going to use it
for non-commercial use for
free. So, we go ahead with that
we get started by creating a new virtual
machine and the installer disk we will have to
tell and that will be already ready for
us in the downloads folder the Ubuntu
iso file is ready for us. So, we pick it up
proceed further and of course it is asking
the first user.
So, let us do that. So, we provide the credentials
which we need to remember because that will be
the first user for the operating system and it
is asking how big is the virtual disks to be and
we say 20 GB that is fine. So, we will have it
that way and the disk can be multiple files
it is a bit easier to move it around okay. So,
we will just leave it with the default option.
So, the virtual machine is now going to be created
and it will get connected with the iso
file for the installation of Ubuntu
and we will leave the options as default.
So, that we will see how the Ubuntu gets
installed with the default configurations.
So, as you can note there is always this
checking of the insulation medium that is done.
So, the insulation medium has been checked and
we are now seeing the Ubuntu screen which means
that the Ubuntu has been booted from the
installation medium and it is now setting
up the OS. ah We can click on this arrow
to see what is the background information
to see some of the text output as
the work is going on to install the
operating system in the virtual disk.
This process will take couple of minutes
depending upon the speed of your hardware.
So, you have to be patient till the entire
process is complete and the virtual machine
has been booted to show you the login screen.
So, while the installation is going on you will
see some slides to tell you about the features of
the operating system. As part of installation
Ubuntu would also check for some updates.
Now you see that the bootloader has been installed
the installation also involves downloading some
packages to keep some of the utilities latest
in terms of the version the package updating
seems to be over now. So, you will see that
the OS will reboot by itself in workstation
player to indicate that the installation is
complete. The first booting may have taken few
moments more but we are now ready with our virtual
machine running Ubuntu 20.04 on top of windows OS
thanks to the VMware workstation player.
So, let us now log in
we log in with the credentials that we gave at the
time of starting the new virtual machine and we
skipped these things the initial welcome etcetera.
And let us search for the terminal app and right
click on that and add it to the favorites and that
is there here. So, we start the terminal app. So,
we have now the virtual machine up and running and
we can now practice our command line environment
right inside the virtual machine of Ubuntu
20.04 running on top of windows 10 host OS.
So, when we are done with our work of course we
can move the content to some other location for
safety but otherwise the machine is now ready to
serve its purpose for us. So, when you are done
with our work we can shut it down one more way of
getting the Linux command line environment up and
running on top of windows operating system is to
install the so, called windows subsystem for Linux
it is actually Ubuntu open system itself.
So, we have searched for windows subscriber Linux
we pick up the link that is from the Microsoft dot
com and go in and see that there is a description
of what is available we will go ahead and install
that by looking at the link. So, it is nothing but
we need to install by using the administrator
powershell. So, that let us open that
okay. So, when I open for powershell we have
those options available run as administrator. So,
click on that and it is asking
us to give some commands.
So, wsl minus minus install okay and
that would then go on with the process
of preparing the Ubuntu open system to run on
top of windows natively supported by microsoft.
So, this process takes couple of minutes.
So, as you can notice it is the Ubuntu OS that
is being installed as the windows subsystem for
Linux. So, we have rebooted the machine
and as you can see the Ubuntu subsystem
installation is proceeding.
So, after few minutes
the window subsystem for Linux installation
will require you to enter the user
with which you can operate that particular
subsystem. So, I enter that now the same
thing as I did for the other virtual
machines. These credentials should be
kept safe because that would be the root user who
can install the utilities on this subsystem and
now the subsystem is up and running for us and we
can just check it is running the kernel 5.10.
And we can explore the command line environment
quite comfortably using the windows up system
for Linux and I hope you will be able to get it
up and running on your windows 10 or windows 11
quite easily. Let us see how to get the
windows up system for Linux up and running.
So, wsl is here. So, you open that and you
would see that it is actually opening a terminal
where you have the command line environment
up and running. So, it is available now here
you can see that we can boot a virtual machine on
workstation player while the windows subsystem is
also up and running on the screen.
So, we now log into the virtual machine
then we open the terminal. So, now you can
see that there are two different command line
environment that is running on top of the windows
open system one is the virtual machine of Ubuntu
running on the host operating system. Thanks to
the workstation player and there is a terminal
environment that is running here and there is
the other environment which is this basically the
the windows subsystem for Linux.
So, you can choose whichever you feel
is sufficient for you to get going with the
practice of command line environment that you
are going to do as part of this course. You can
explore the command line environment on the cloud
as well as on your mobile phone. On the cloud
you have the options like the replit dot com or
cocalc dot com which we will see shortly. And on
your phone you have the terabox app from fredrik
fornwall which will help you see a tiny command
line environment right on your mobile phone.
Let us explore those options. Now if you are
looking for a cloud-based environment to try
out the command line exercises as part of
this course I would recommend you to have a
look at replit dot com website. So, I am opening
that here. So, if you do not have a an account on
Google or Facebook or Github you may want to sign
up and create your own login there or you could
just log in directly using your Google account.
And once you log in you would see a dashboard
where you could actually create some projects. So,
here we have a project that we could create and
we need to give a name for the project and
also what type of a project that is. So,
we create that as a bash project and the
name I would just choose it as Bsc demo okay.
And once the project has been launched
you could expand the terminal window here
and click on the tab button for the shell.
And then you have the shell
readily available for you in the cloud
environment and what is it providing you
You could see that a kernel 5.11 is there
available for you readily and the home directory
is slash home slash runner that is where as
a cloud user your stuff is all kept and the
project that we have created just now Bsc demo
is created there. So, that any script that you
have made will be in that particular folder which
is there in the profile so you could actually so
that you could actually look at it again once
you want to make some changes later on.
You could actually revisit your
scripts time to time to edit them
and make them work as you wanted for any specific
task for an assignment to practice etcetera
and you could see that there are a lot
of mount points that have been created
here we can look at the meaning
of these as we go along.
So, how do we come out you could
just click here and then log out.
So, if you are interested in using the command
line environment or learning the batch scripting
using a public cloud environment on the browser
then cocalc dot com is one such website.
You could sign in using either your
Facebook account Github account Google
account or Twitter account or you could
also sign up to create a login for yourself
I am getting in using my Google account.
Once you get in there is a dashboard where
you could create a new project unless
you have already done that in a previous
launch. So, I now create a new project you
want you must give a name for that.
So, I call it as command line
practice and create the project
now once the project is created if there are some
files that are available in the project it would
be showing up here right now there is nothing
there. But I need to first start the project
okay now the project is
running. So, I could now create
notebooks or environments for me to work.
So, I create the terminal environment
and the time stamp is given as a unique identifier
but I can just call it as cmd practice create.
And we now have a shell that is readily for us
to practice the command and environment let me
increase the font size a little bit so that the
output is shown here. So, you could see that the
cloud user is placed with the home
directory as slash home slash user.
And the cloud environment is
providing us a kernel 5.11 version
and there are a number of mount points
that have been uh mounted here.
And we will look at that at some point later
and you could see that if you create files
they are all there in this folder. So, you
could actually save them and then come back
to visit them to edit scripts that you may want
to do. And once you are done you can close the
environment and also close this particular project
click on the running status and stop the project.
And let us say you do not want to keep
this you could also delete the project
and if you want it to run faster perhaps
you may have to buy a license.
Now we are back to the dashboard and
here you can see that there is one
project that is already there. So,
next time around we can actually
enter this project to start working on what we
have already created here. So, here I click on
the common practice again and open the shell
once more. So, I open the shell once more to see
where we are and you could see that
if you have created files they will be
there and you can continue to work.
And we now close it stop the project
and log out.
If you are interested you could also
try out the command line environment
right on your mobile phone. Open the
google play store and search for termix
app you would notice it is from frederick
phone wall go ahead and install that app.
The installation will take just a couple of
seconds if your network speed is good.
Open the app and using the keyboard
on the screen you have a tiny
terminal that is available for you to try
out the command line environment. You will
see that the home directory is somewhere under
the turmoix environment and the kernel 4 point
the terminal is using kernel 4.14
you would also see that there are a lot of mount
points. You could use the storage of the phone.
And you also have confirmation that the
environment you are using is actually the bash.
So, go ahead and use command line
environment right on your phone.